This chapter describes the multicore aspects of LM's virtual machine and
provides a detailed experimental evaluation. First, we describe how local node
computation and parallelism are integrated, with a focus on locking and memory
allocation, and then we evaluate the performance, memory usage and scalability
of our implementation.

\section{Parallelism}\label{sec:implementation:parallelism}
\input{implementation/parallelism}
\input{implementation/locks}

\section{Runtime Data Structures And Garbage Collection}

LM supports recursive types such as lists, arrays and structures. These compound
data structures are immutable and shared between multiple facts. Such structures
are stored in the heap of the VM and are managed through reference counting. For
instance, each list is a \emph{cons cell} with 3 fields: \texttt{tail}, the
pointer to the next element of the list; \texttt{head}, the element stored by
this element of the list; and \texttt{refs}, which counts the number of pointers
to this list element in the VM. The list is deleted from the heap whenever
\texttt{refs} is decremented to zero.

Nodes are also subject to garbage collection. If the database of a node becomes
empty and there are no references to the node from other logical facts, then the
node is deleted from the program. We keep around a small number of freed nodes
that can be reused immediately if another node is created. We avoid garbage
collection schemes based on tracing since objects are created and discarded in
very specific points of the virtual machine. A reference counting mechanism is
thus more appropriate than a parallel tracing garbage collector which would
entail pausing the execution of the program to garbage collect all the unused
objects.

\section{Memory Allocation}\label{section:implementation:allocation}
\input{implementation/allocation}

\section{Experimental Evaluation}
\input{implementation/evaluation}

\section{Related Work}
\input{implementation/related_work}

\section{Chapter Summary}

This chapter provided a full description of the multicore implementation of LM,
with a focus on thread management, work stealing and memory allocation.  We
explained how the virtual machine is organized to provide scalable multi
threaded execution and provided experiments on a wide range of problems to
demonstrate its applicability and scalability. We also studied the importance of
good memory allocators for improved scalability and execution.
